README.md, before:

Express 4.x and Passport Local Example
=====================

We are assuming that you already completed the [CRUD tutorial](https://github.com/cortezcristian/express4crud). The main application has this urls:

| URL           | Method | Description              |
| :----         | :----: | :----                    |
| /list         | GET    | List all persons         |
| /p/new        | GET    | Displays creation form   |
| /p/new        | POST   | Handles persons creation |
| /p/delete/:id | GET    | Delete records           |
| /p/edit/:id   | GET    | Display edit form        |
| /p/edit/:id   | POST   | Edit persons information |

Now we want to add a local authentication layer to protect the listed urls. We are creating an administrator role, that'll access the private urls via login in a new url called `/login`. Let's enumerate a list of tasks we do need to accomplish for this to happen:

1. Create Admin model. (Model: `./models/admin.js`)
2. Add an admin fixture, to be preloaded when server starts. (Credentials: admin@admin.com:123456)
3. Create `/login` route. (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
4. Create a login form. (View: `./views/login.jade`)
5. Create Passport Local Strategy
6. Handle login form via POST to `/login`. (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
7. Use Local Strategy
8. Securitize CRUD routes (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
9. Create Logout route (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
10. Destroy Session Data
11. Add Log-out button into the layout

![Task Graph](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cortezcristian/express4passport-local/master/pics/auth-layer-passport-local.png)

## Create Admin Model

Let's create a basic model `./models/admins.js` with basic credentials fields like so:

```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var Schema = mongoose.Schema;

var adminSchema = new Schema({
    email: String,
    password: String
});

var adminModel = mongoose.model('Admins', adminSchema);

module.exports = adminModel;
```

So we have the basic model, let's create a basic test `test/admins-test.js`:
```javascript
var Admin = require('../models/admins');
var mongoose = require('mongoose');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');

var a = new Admin({ email:"admin@admin.com", password: "123456" });
a.save(function(err, doc){
    console.log(err, doc);    
});

```

If we run this, we'll create an admin.

```bash
$ node test/admins-test.js
null { __v: 0,
  email: 'admin@admin.com',
  password: '123456',
  _id: 546fe06f0aff37711bb5a517 }

```

Something is really bad here. Did you noticed? We are storing a plain password, that's not good let's improve our model a little bit:

```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var Schema = mongoose.Schema;
+var crypto = require('crypto');

var adminSchema = new Schema({
    email: String,
    password: String
});

+/**
+ * Pre-Save Hook
+ * http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#schema_Schema-pre
+ */
+
+adminSchema.pre("save", function(next) {
+    if(this.isModified('password'))
+        this.password = crypto.createHash('md5').update(this.password).digest("hex");
+    next();
+});

var adminModel = mongoose.model('Admins', adminSchema);

module.exports = adminModel;
```
We just added the [crypto module](http://nodejs.org/api/crypto.html) to use the MD5 hash creation method, we are also adding functionallity to add a [pre-save hook](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#schema_Schema-pre) to our schema definition. 

```bash
$ node test/admins-test.js 
null { __v: 0,
  email: 'admin@admin.com',
  password: 'e10adc3949ba59abbe56e057f20f883e',
  _id: 546fed1f3561b0641e4eb34b }
```

As we can see now if password is modified we automatically turn that into a MD5 hash. Let's create and authentication method so each admin can test passwords.

```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var Schema = mongoose.Schema;
var crypto = require('crypto');

var adminSchema = new Schema({
    email: String,
    password: String
});

/**
 * Pre-Save Hook
 * http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#schema_Schema-pre
 */

adminSchema.pre("save", function(next) {
    if(this.isModified('password'))
        this.password = crypto.createHash('md5').update(this.password).digest("hex");
    next();
});
+
+adminSchema.method('authenticate', function(password) {
+    return crypto.createHash('md5').update(password).digest("hex") === this.password;
+});

var adminModel = mongoose.model('Admins', adminSchema);

module.exports = adminModel;
```

And we can test it by modifying our test `./test/admins-test.js`.

```javascript
var Admin = require('../models/admins');
var mongoose = require('mongoose');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');

var a = new Admin({ email:"admin@admin.com", password: "123456" });
a.save(function(err, doc){
    console.log(err, doc);    
+
+    console.log("PasswordOK", a.authenticate("123456"));
+    console.log("PasswordFAIL", a.authenticate("incorrect"));
});

```

We can test again our method to see if it works:

```bash
$ node test/admins-test.js 
null { __v: 0,
  email: 'admin@admin.com',
  password: 'e10adc3949ba59abbe56e057f20f883e',
  _id: 546ff176b6c3be1a20c3a734 }
PasswordOK true
PasswordFAIL false
```

That's it! we have our admin model ready.

## Adding Fixtures

Fixtures a data-sets we store in our programming language and sync them with the DB when necessary. They are important specially when running tests, or if you don't want to show your webapp empty. In this example, we are going to use [mongoose-fixtures](https://github.com/powmedia/mongoose-fixtures) to pre-load persons and admins everytime we start the server.

```bash
$ npm install --save mongoose-fixtures
```

Let's create a folder to store our fixtures.

```bash
$ mkdir fixtures
```

Let's create an admin fixture ``:

```bash
$ mkdir fixtures
```

Let's create a file to store persons personal data `fixtures/persons.js`:

```javascript
exports.Persons = [
    { name: 'Cristian', age: 27 },
    { name: 'Maria', age: 22 },
    { name: 'Ignacio', age: 32 }
];
```

We do need to add the new package into our `app.js`

```javascript
var express = require('express');
var path = require('path');
var favicon = require('serve-favicon');
var logger = require('morgan');
var cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');
var bodyParser = require('body-parser');
var session = require('express-session')
var flash = require('connect-flash');

var routes = require('./routes/index');
var users = require('./routes/user');

var mongoose = require('mongoose');
+var fixtures = require('mongoose-fixtures');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');
+
+fixtures.load('./fixtures/persons.js');

var app = exports.app = express();
....
```

If we run the server again:
```bash
$ npm start
```

And go to [http://localhost:3000/list](http://localhost:3000/list):

![Fixtures List](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cortezcristian/express4passport-local/master/pics/fixtures-list.png)

As you can see persons fixtures have been preloaded, also notice that everytime you restart the server mongoose-fixtures will empty your collections and fill them with specified datasets. Try adding and/or removing and restarting the server.

Let's do the same with the admins so we can have at least one administrator available to do our implementation. Add `fixtures/admins.js` file:

```javascript
exports.Admins = [
    { email: 'admin@admin.com', password: '123456' }
];

```

And do the following changes into `app.js`

```javascript
var express = require('express');
var path = require('path');
var favicon = require('serve-favicon');
var logger = require('morgan');
var cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');
var bodyParser = require('body-parser');
var session = require('express-session')
var flash = require('connect-flash');

var routes = require('./routes/index');
var users = require('./routes/user');

var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var fixtures = require('mongoose-fixtures');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');

+fixtures.load('./fixtures/admins.js');
fixtures.load('./fixtures/persons.js');

```

Include the model inside `./routes/main.js`:

```javascript
var app = module.parent.exports.app;
var Persons = require('../models/persons.js');
+var Admins = require('../models/admins.js');

app.get('/list', function(req, res){
    var msg = req.flash('message');
    Persons.find({}, function(err, docs){
        res.render('list', { title: 'List', persons: docs, flashmsg: msg});
    });
});
.....
```

Congrats! We succesfully added fixtures into our app.

## Login Form

Let's create our login form.

![Login Form]()

To begin, we need to add the `/login` route, into our `./routes/main.js`:

```javascript
var app = module.parent.exports.app;
var Persons = require('../models/persons.js');
var Admins = require('../models/admins.js');

+app.get('/login', function(req, res){
+    res.render('login', { title: 'Login'});
+});
+
app.get('/list', function(req, res){
    var msg = req.flash('message');
```

Secondlly, we do create the view file `./views/login.jade`:

```javascript
extends layout

block content
  h1= title
  form(action='/login',method='post')
    div
      label(for='email') E-mail:
      input(type='text', name='email', id='email', placeholder='E-mail here...')
    div
      label(for='password') Pasword:
      input(type='password', name='password', id='password', placeholder='Password...')
    div
      input(type='submit', value='Login')
  style.
    form label { min-width: 80px; display: inline-block; }
    form > div { padding: 5px; }
```

Finally we do set the POST url `/login` to receive the login form data, for now we add just a mock to catch and display data received. So we do add the following into `./routes/main.js`:

```javascript
var app = module.parent.exports.app;
var Persons = require('../models/persons.js');
var Admins = require('../models/admins.js');

app.get('/login', function(req, res){
    res.render('login', { title: 'Login'});
});

+app.post('/login', function(req, res){
+    res.json(req.body);
+});
+
app.get('/list', function(req, res){
    var msg = req.flash('message');
    Persons.find({}, function(err, docs){
```

To test all that you can simply go to [http://localhost:3000/login](http://localhost:3000/login), and by submitting data you should be able to get the data inserted back. Don't you worry, just go ahead with next step we'll get back to this POST url later.

![Post Login JSON]()

## Passport

Commit message:

Adding Passport and passport-local

README.md, after:

Express 4.x and Passport Local Example
=====================

We are assuming that you already completed the [CRUD tutorial](https://github.com/cortezcristian/express4crud). The main application has this urls:

| URL           | Method | Description              |
| :----         | :----: | :----                    |
| /list         | GET    | List all persons         |
| /p/new        | GET    | Displays creation form   |
| /p/new        | POST   | Handles persons creation |
| /p/delete/:id | GET    | Delete records           |
| /p/edit/:id   | GET    | Display edit form        |
| /p/edit/:id   | POST   | Edit persons information |

Now we want to add a local authentication layer to protect the listed urls. We are creating an administrator role, that'll access the private urls via login in a new url called `/login`. Let's enumerate a list of tasks we do need to accomplish for this to happen:

1. Create Admin model. (Model: `./models/admin.js`)
2. Add an admin fixture, to be preloaded when server starts. (Credentials: admin@admin.com:123456)
3. Create `/login` route. (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
4. Create a login form. (View: `./views/login.jade`)
5. Create Passport Local Strategy
6. Handle login form via POST to `/login`. (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
7. Use Local Strategy
8. Securitize CRUD routes (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
9. Create Logout route (Route: `./routes/main.js`)
10. Destroy Session Data
11. Add Log-out button into the layout

![Task Graph](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cortezcristian/express4passport-local/master/pics/auth-layer-passport-local.png)

## Create Admin Model

Let's create a basic model `./models/admins.js` with basic credentials fields like so:

```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var Schema = mongoose.Schema;

var adminSchema = new Schema({
    email: String,
    password: String
});

var adminModel = mongoose.model('Admins', adminSchema);

module.exports = adminModel;
```

So we have the basic model, let's create a basic test `test/admins-test.js`:
```javascript
var Admin = require('../models/admins');
var mongoose = require('mongoose');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');

var a = new Admin({ email:"admin@admin.com", password: "123456" });
a.save(function(err, doc){
    console.log(err, doc);    
});

```

If we run this, we'll create an admin.

```bash
$ node test/admins-test.js
null { __v: 0,
  email: 'admin@admin.com',
  password: '123456',
  _id: 546fe06f0aff37711bb5a517 }

```

Something is really bad here. Did you noticed? We are storing a plain password, that's not good let's improve our model a little bit:

```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var Schema = mongoose.Schema;
+var crypto = require('crypto');

var adminSchema = new Schema({
    email: String,
    password: String
});

+/**
+ * Pre-Save Hook
+ * http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#schema_Schema-pre
+ */
+
+adminSchema.pre("save", function(next) {
+    if(this.isModified('password'))
+        this.password = crypto.createHash('md5').update(this.password).digest("hex");
+    next();
+});

var adminModel = mongoose.model('Admins', adminSchema);

module.exports = adminModel;
```
We just added the [crypto module](http://nodejs.org/api/crypto.html) to use the MD5 hash creation method, we are also adding functionallity to add a [pre-save hook](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#schema_Schema-pre) to our schema definition. 

```bash
$ node test/admins-test.js 
null { __v: 0,
  email: 'admin@admin.com',
  password: 'e10adc3949ba59abbe56e057f20f883e',
  _id: 546fed1f3561b0641e4eb34b }
```

As we can see now if password is modified we automatically turn that into a MD5 hash. Let's create and authentication method so each admin can test passwords.

```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var Schema = mongoose.Schema;
var crypto = require('crypto');

var adminSchema = new Schema({
    email: String,
    password: String
});

/**
 * Pre-Save Hook
 * http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#schema_Schema-pre
 */

adminSchema.pre("save", function(next) {
    if(this.isModified('password'))
        this.password = crypto.createHash('md5').update(this.password).digest("hex");
    next();
});
+
+adminSchema.method('authenticate', function(password) {
+    return crypto.createHash('md5').update(password).digest("hex") === this.password;
+});

var adminModel = mongoose.model('Admins', adminSchema);

module.exports = adminModel;
```

And we can test it by modifying our test `./test/admins-test.js`.

```javascript
var Admin = require('../models/admins');
var mongoose = require('mongoose');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');

var a = new Admin({ email:"admin@admin.com", password: "123456" });
a.save(function(err, doc){
    console.log(err, doc);    
+
+    console.log("PasswordOK", a.authenticate("123456"));
+    console.log("PasswordFAIL", a.authenticate("incorrect"));
});

```

We can test again our method to see if it works:

```bash
$ node test/admins-test.js 
null { __v: 0,
  email: 'admin@admin.com',
  password: 'e10adc3949ba59abbe56e057f20f883e',
  _id: 546ff176b6c3be1a20c3a734 }
PasswordOK true
PasswordFAIL false
```

That's it! we have our admin model ready.

## Adding Fixtures

Fixtures a data-sets we store in our programming language and sync them with the DB when necessary. They are important specially when running tests, or if you don't want to show your webapp empty. In this example, we are going to use [mongoose-fixtures](https://github.com/powmedia/mongoose-fixtures) to pre-load persons and admins everytime we start the server.

```bash
$ npm install --save mongoose-fixtures
```

Let's create a folder to store our fixtures.

```bash
$ mkdir fixtures
```

Let's create an admin fixture ``:

```bash
$ mkdir fixtures
```

Let's create a file to store persons personal data `fixtures/persons.js`:

```javascript
exports.Persons = [
    { name: 'Cristian', age: 27 },
    { name: 'Maria', age: 22 },
    { name: 'Ignacio', age: 32 }
];
```

We do need to add the new package into our `app.js`

```javascript
var express = require('express');
var path = require('path');
var favicon = require('serve-favicon');
var logger = require('morgan');
var cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');
var bodyParser = require('body-parser');
var session = require('express-session')
var flash = require('connect-flash');

var routes = require('./routes/index');
var users = require('./routes/user');

var mongoose = require('mongoose');
+var fixtures = require('mongoose-fixtures');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');
+
+fixtures.load('./fixtures/persons.js');

var app = exports.app = express();
....
```

If we run the server again:
```bash
$ npm start
```

And go to [http://localhost:3000/list](http://localhost:3000/list):

![Fixtures List](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cortezcristian/express4passport-local/master/pics/fixtures-list.png)

As you can see persons fixtures have been preloaded, also notice that everytime you restart the server mongoose-fixtures will empty your collections and fill them with specified datasets. Try adding and/or removing and restarting the server.

Let's do the same with the admins so we can have at least one administrator available to do our implementation. Add `fixtures/admins.js` file:

```javascript
exports.Admins = [
    { email: 'admin@admin.com', password: '123456' }
];

```

And do the following changes into `app.js`

```javascript
var express = require('express');
var path = require('path');
var favicon = require('serve-favicon');
var logger = require('morgan');
var cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');
var bodyParser = require('body-parser');
var session = require('express-session')
var flash = require('connect-flash');

var routes = require('./routes/index');
var users = require('./routes/user');

var mongoose = require('mongoose');
var fixtures = require('mongoose-fixtures');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/crudtest');

+fixtures.load('./fixtures/admins.js');
fixtures.load('./fixtures/persons.js');

```

Include the model inside `./routes/main.js`:

```javascript
var app = module.parent.exports.app;
var Persons = require('../models/persons.js');
+var Admins = require('../models/admins.js');

app.get('/list', function(req, res){
    var msg = req.flash('message');
    Persons.find({}, function(err, docs){
        res.render('list', { title: 'List', persons: docs, flashmsg: msg});
    });
});
.....
```

Congrats! We succesfully added fixtures into our app.

## Login Form

Let's create our login form.

![Login Form](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cortezcristian/express4passport-local/master/pics/login-form.png)

To begin, we need to add the `/login` route, into our `./routes/main.js`:

```javascript
var app = module.parent.exports.app;
var Persons = require('../models/persons.js');
var Admins = require('../models/admins.js');

+app.get('/login', function(req, res){
+    res.render('login', { title: 'Login'});
+});
+
app.get('/list', function(req, res){
    var msg = req.flash('message');
```

Secondlly, we do create the view file `./views/login.jade`:

```javascript
extends layout

block content
  h1= title
  form(action='/login',method='post')
    div
      label(for='email') E-mail:
      input(type='text', name='email', id='email', placeholder='E-mail here...')
    div
      label(for='password') Pasword:
      input(type='password', name='password', id='password', placeholder='Password...')
    div
      input(type='submit', value='Login')
  style.
    form label { min-width: 80px; display: inline-block; }
    form > div { padding: 5px; }
```

Finally we do set the POST url `/login` to receive the login form data, for now we add just a mock to catch and display data received. So we do add the following into `./routes/main.js`:

```javascript
var app = module.parent.exports.app;
var Persons = require('../models/persons.js');
var Admins = require('../models/admins.js');

app.get('/login', function(req, res){
    res.render('login', { title: 'Login'});
});

+app.post('/login', function(req, res){
+    res.json(req.body);
+});
+
app.get('/list', function(req, res){
    var msg = req.flash('message');
    Persons.find({}, function(err, docs){
```

To test all that you can simply go to [http://localhost:3000/login](http://localhost:3000/login), and by submitting data you should be able to get the data inserted back. Don't you worry, just go ahead with next step we'll get back to this POST url later.

![Post Login JSON](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cortezcristian/express4passport-local/master/pics/login-form-json.png)

## Passport

Passport is authentication middleware for Node.js, that works really well with Express, see [http://passportjs.org/](http://passportjs.org/). Passport let you define strategies, for this project we'll need Passport core, and passport-local package. So let's install them:

```bash
$ npm install --save passport passport-local
```
